---
title:  "WUF 11"
layout: post
date:   2022-06-30 00:00:00
---

{% marginfigure 'wuf_img' 'assets/img/wuf.png' '"Proof" I _did_ go to WUF 11'  %}


This week I attended my first World Urban Forum (WUF), the UN's biannual
jamboree to celebrate cities, work done on cities, and work to do on cities. I
confess that, for someone who's be "doing cities" for the better part of 15
years, I'm a bit embarrassed it took me this long to show up to one of these.
I'm glad I did. So, while it's still hot in my memory and before I go back to
the pile of email accummulated, I'll try to commit to words a few of my
impressions. Expect some ideas on cities, some on conferences in the new
normal, and some on first-time conferences.

Start with things I've learned about cities. I leave Katowice with a copy of
the [2022 World Cities Report](https://unhabitat.org/wcr/), freshly released this week. More
importantly, I leave with the determination to spend some quality time with
the document, and giving some of the proposals in it the time they deserve.
Some of the ideas I picked up from the press release are intriguing (e.g.,
"localising" SDGs), others exciting (e.g., a new social contract channeled
through cities), and others I was more familiar with (e.g., 15-minute cities)
but it's fantastic to see they have found their place in a document of this
caliber.

I focused most my time on sessions that touch directly my areas of expertise.
Although not obvious at first sight, the WUF does bring together quite a few
data nerds to discuss the potential and risks of weaving technology and data
through the urban fabric. There were three highlights to me.

First, the session on the report on [cities and AI](https://wuf.unhabitat.org/event/ai-and-cities-guidelines-ethical-use-ai-local-authorities?user_id=4497598&first_name=Daniel&last_name=Arribas-Bel&email=d.arribas-bel@liverpool.ac.uk&lang=en-GB&session_id=615219&session_name=NE%2070%20%20-%20%20AI%20and%20Cities%20%3A%20guidelines%20for%20an%20ethical%20use%20of%20AI%20by%20local%20authorities&external_id=SCA-234280-4018834).{% sidenote "twitter-thread" "The report itself has not been published yet, but I look forward to reading it when it does come
out" %} It was great to see explicit brain power by a group of folks who
collectively really understand both cities and AI. Unfortunately, the
report itself has not been published yet, but I look forward to reading it
when it does come out.

Second, the session on [earth observation for SDGs](https://wuf.unhabitat.org/event/earth-observations-toolkit-sustainable-cities-and-human-settlements-supporting-evidence-based?user_id=4497598&first_name=Daniel&last_name=Arribas-Bel&email=d.arribas-bel@liverpool.ac.uk&lang=en-GB&session_id=615339&session_name=TE%2017%20-%20The%20Earth%20Observations%20Toolkit%20for%20Sustainable%20Cities%20and%20Human%20Settlements%20-%20Supporting%20Evidence-based%20policy-making%20for%20Equitable%20Urban%20Futures&external_id=SCA-234280-4018834), which showcased a
bunch of really interesting projects in this space (pun intended!), including
UN's [Earth Observation Toolkit](https://eotoolkit.unhabitat.org), Prof. Yifang Ban's [Earth Enginge
app](https://eo4sdg11.users.earthengine.app/view/sdg-1131-indicator) for SDG 11.3.1, or the South African's space agency efforts to build
a "national GHSL". My takeaway from this session however was brought by
Dennis Mwaniki from UN Habitat who noted that there is a _lot_ of work on SDG
11.3.1 ("ratio
of land consumption rate to population growth rate") and less in others (e.g.,
those on mobility and public transit), perhaps because it lends itself much
more to be addressed with tools which have developed greatly over the last
few years such as satellite technology. Food for thought.

The third highlight has to do with GHSL. The [Global Human Settlement
Layer](https://ghsl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/) is the term used to refer to the family of data products on human
settlements on Earth that the European Commission (EC) and the Joint Research
Centre (JRC) has been pushing on at least since 2016. At this WUF, JRC
announced GHSL 2.0 which updates and widely expands the offering of datasets
made available. There was special love for the [Degree of Urbanisation](https://ghsl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/degurba.php)
product, which is now making its way into all sorts of policy arenas. To me
however the most significant anouncement was the news that, from next year
onwards, GHSL will transition from JRC into the Copernicus programme and will
thus become part of the family of data that ESA and EC regularly take care of
(think of it as a Sentinel mission for human settlements). As someone who's
been watching the new forms of data lanscape for a few years now and has seen
many projects launch a flashy first release and then quickly wane, there is
something very refreshing about a team making efforts to not only innovate on
how we measure human activity but to ensure such advances have sustainability
over time. Bravo!

Besides content, I learnt a lot about the "container". WUF was my first big
conference (+16k people) since COVID. It was live streamed for free for anyone
to join remotely. In some ways, the space helped blend the hybrid experience:
many sessions were on a (really) large hangar-like space that had been
subdivided with very thin walls and no ceilings. Rather than piping sound into
speakers for every room (which would make the whole thing quite the
cacophony), sound was shared directly on the web stream and on headphones that
everyone picked up at the begining of the session and left at the end for
charging. Maybe this is standard in UN-land, but it was new to me, and I
really liked it. It made the streaming, and live translation when available
(main sessions) much more a first-class citizen experience because everyone
was essentially augmenting their experience with headphones. It made it
possible to have a lot of parallel sessions in essentially the same big space.
And it also made bringing remote speakers (e.g., many folks saw their flights
cancelled last minute) to a panel or a talk much more natural for similar
reasons as above.

And a few thoughts on my own experience as a WUF newbie. The first is that
the "UN vibes" that emmanate from all over the conference are just very cool.
As an academic, I'm used to one very particular type of conference, and
experiencing what a truly global community of policy makers, practitioners,
and other academics excited about cities feels like was super nice.
At times, I felt like I was in
the middle of a [Malka Older novel](https://us.macmillan.com/series/thecentenalcycle) or in one of [The Expanse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Expanse_(TV_series))
episodes around the futuristic UN.

At the same time, this was a conference a bit out of my comfort zone and
definitely beyond my usual networks. As a full professor who's been regularly going to
conferences for over a decade, it was at once refreshing, overwhelming, and
humbling to be in one where you almost don't know anyone.
In some ways, coming to WUF made me (more) aware of the challenges for early
career folk who attend their first conferences, and I hope I can take some of
this feeling into action in events I'm more involved.
Finally, it was also a good
reminder that the temptation is big to think that, as we become more senior,
we enjoy conferences more because we learn to "do conferences" better; but in
fact, it is more likely that we find "our crowd" and limit ourselves to it for
the most part. Stepping out of this pattern is challenging but important.

In summary, WUF 11 has been been a blast. I've learned a lot, met some very
cool people, and left with a renewed sense of awe and urgency about working on
cities. I'm glad I came and I hope it is not the last time.

